Blogpost for Hybrid Search Options and Practice (#3732)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-04-11-Hybrid-Search-Options-And-Practice.md

meta_description: Learn about different searches in OpenSearch. Discover how hybrid search merges results from multiple query sources for improved relevance.
---

In the evolving world of search technology, OpenSearch stands out with its powerful search capabilities. OpenSearch offers a range of search techniques, starting with basic lexical search using BM25 (Best Matching 25), which excels at keyword-based retrieval and remains a cornerstone of many search applications. The evolution continues with semantic search, which leverages dense vector embeddings to capture the semantic meaning beyond keywords. Advanced hybrid techniques combine lexical and semantic approaches, using normalization methods like score-based and rank-based algorithms to balance and integrate scores from different search methods. These techniques progressively enhance search relevance and flexibility, catering to diverse search requirements in modern applications. This blog post will guide you through this series of search techniques, from BM25 to hybrid search and provide an overview of how Hybrid Search works in OpenSearch.

### 1. Lexical Search vs Semantic Search

#### Lexical Search (BM25) 

> BM25 (Best Matching 25) is a probabilistic retrieval framework used as the default scoring algorithm in OpenSearch.. It is implemented as part of the standard full-text search capabilities. Queries like multi match, range or term queries allowing for field-specific boosting and flexible matching criteria uses BM25 scoring technique. This makes it a versatile choice for a wide range of search applications, from e-commerce product searches to document retrieval systems.

Reviewer: nit. Remove extra dot

  "phase_results_processors": [
    {
      "score-ranker-processor": {
        "combination": {
          "technique": "rrf"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

```
GET /bookstore_catalog/_search?search_pipeline=rrf-pipeline
{
  "query": {
    "hybrid": {
      "queries": [
        {
          "match": {
            "title": {
              "query": "science fiction"
            }
          }
        },
        {
          "neural": {
            "title_embedding": {
              "query_text": "science fiction",
              "model_id": "aVeif4oB5Vm0Tdw8zYO2",
              "k": 5
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

This query uses:

* `hybrid`: Combines lexical and semantic searches
* `search_pipeline`: Applies the RRF score combination

How RRF works:

1. **Sort documents by score**: Each query method sorts documents by score.
2. **Assign rank positions**: Documents are ranked based on score for each query.
3. **Apply the RRF formula**: The RRF score is computed using the following formula:

```
rankScore(document_i) = sum((1/(k + query_1_rank), (1/(k + query_2_rank), ..., (1/(k + query_j_rank)))

```

> In this formula, `k` is a rank constant, and `query_j_rank` represents the ranking of a document in a particular query method. The example in the following diagram applies this formula using the default rank constant of 60.

Reviewer 2: @owaiskazi19 Could you add the diagram?

Author: @kolchfa-aws I have removed the line

---
layout: post
title:  Hybrid Search with OpenSearch: Options and Practice
authors:
  - kazabdu
  - xiaoyu
date: 2025-04-08
has_science_table: true
categories:
  - technical-posts

> meta_keywords: z-score normalization, OpenSearch, neural search plugin, hybrid search, relevance ranking, search normalization, k-nn search, min-max normalization, how reciprocal rank fusion works

Author: The reason for this blogpost is to introduce hybrid search to new users. Since we have 2 types of normalization: score based and rank based. We just picked the one one from each category since we don't to make this blogpost about different normalization techniques. There's another blogpost coming for z score already: https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/pull/3720

### 1. Lexical Search vs Semantic Search

#### Lexical Search (BM25) 

BM25 (Best Matching 25) is a probabilistic retrieval framework used as the default scoring algorithm in many search engines, including OpenSearch. In OpenSearch, BM25 is implemented as part of the standard full-text search capabilities. It can be easily applied across multiple fields using the multi match, range or term queries allowing for field-specific boosting and flexible matching criteria. This makes it a versatile choice for a wide range of search applications, from e-commerce product searches to document retrieval systems.

API Request:

```
GET /bookstore_catalog/_search
{
  "query": {
    "match": {
      "title": "the martian"
    }
  }
}
```

#### Semantic Search

> Semantic search in OpenSearch represents a significant advancement in search technology, leveraging the power of machine learning and natural language processing. This approach uses dense vector embeddings to represent both documents and queries in a high-dimensional space, allowing for semantic similarity comparisons that go beyond simple keyword matching. At the core of semantic search is the concept of text embeddings - dense vector representations of text that capture semantic meaning. These embeddings are typically generated using large language models trained on vast corpora of text. In OpenSearch, these embeddings are stored as dense vector fields and can be efficiently searched using k nearest neighbor algorithms. At search time, the user's query is similarly transformed into a vector embedding. The system then finds documents whose vector representations are closest to the query vector, typically using cosine similarity or Euclidean distance.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure that is correct statement: "typically using cosine similarity or Euclidean distance." Exact space type is use-case dependent, and I see inner product/dot product far more often. You can frame it something like "The system then finds documents whose vector representations are closest to the query vector, using different space types like inner product, cosine similarity, and others to measure the similarity between the query and document embeddings."

API Request:

```
GET /bookstore_catalog/_search
{
  "_source": {
    "excludes": [
      "passage_embedding"
    ]
  },
  "query": {
    "neural": {
      "title_embedding": {
        "query_text": "science fiction",
        "k": 100
      }
    }
  }
}
```

This query uses:

* `title_embedding`: The query vector of the field title.
* `k`: Number of nearest neighbors to retrieve

In summary, lexical search algorithms like BM25 provide precise keyword matching. They are fast and efficient but do not incorporate semantic meaning. On the other hand, semantic search understands meaning and context, handling natural language queries well. However, it may miss important keywords, especially for fact-based queries. As we enter the era of Generative AI, an increasing number of use cases require both keyword matching and semantic understanding. Hybrid search is OpenSearch's solution to address this need, combining the strengths of both approaches.

### 2. Hybrid Search: Solving the Problem and Options

> 

Author: That's what the next line was doing but I have modified it little more for simpler terms.

> Hybrid search often involves combining scores from different search methods (e.g., BM25 for keyword search and semantics for vector search). However, these scores can have vastly different scales and distributions. Normalization helps to bring these scores into a common range, allowing for fair comparison and combination. OpenSearch offers various normalization techniques that can be broadly categorized into two main types: Score-based and Rank-based. Let's explore these categories and their specific techniques in detail.

Reviewer 3: can you add example of such queries where scores are at different scales, e.g. knn with L2 space vs text match query, or even within one query like knn with L2 and inner product when vectors are not normalized (latest can be unbounded, actual scores can be [-200, .. +200]

> Score-based techniques directly manipulate the raw scores returned by search algorithms. These methods are useful when the actual score values carry meaningful information that should be preserved in some form. There are 3 different types of score based normalization technique: Min max, L2 and z_score (will be released in 3.0-beta1). In this section, we would talk about min max normalization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Score-based techniques directly manipulate the raw scores returned by search algorithms. These methods are useful when the actual score values carry meaningful information that should be preserved in some form. There are 3 different types of score based normalization technique: Min max, L2 and z-score (will be released in 3.0). In this section, we would talk about min max normalization.
```

#### Hybrid Search with Min-Max Normalization Technique

Min-Max normalization scales scores to a fixed range, typically [0, 1], preserving the relative distribution of scores.

> `normalized_score = (score - min_score) / (max_score - min_score)`

Author: These are max and min score of the subquery. I have added an one liner for the explanation

First, we need to define a search pipeline for min-max normalization:

API Request:

```
PUT /_search/pipeline/min_max-search-pipeline
{
  "description": "Post processor for hybrid search",
  "phase_results_processors": [
    {
      "normalization-processor": {
        "normalization": {
          "technique": "min_max"
        },
        "combination": {
          "technique": "arithmetic_mean",
          "parameters": {
            "weights": [
              0.3,
              0.7
            ]
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

Use the same search pipeline with the search request

```
GET /bookstore_catalog/_search?search_pipeline=min_max-search-pipeline
{

>   "_source": {

Reviewer 3: this section can be dropped, not significant for this post

          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}

```

This query uses:

* `hybrid`: OpenSearch's built-in hybrid query type
* `search_pipeline`: Applies the min-max normalization and score combination

How it works:

1. OpenSearch executes both the `match` and `neural` queries.
2. The `min_max-search-pipeline` normalizes scores using min-max scaling.
3. Normalized scores are combined using a weighted arithmetic mean (30% lexical, 70% neural in this case which were defined in the search pipeline).

**When to use score normalization:**

* **When You Can Calibrate or Train Weights:** If you have a reliable way to normalize scores (e.g. using min-max or L2 norms) and **tune the weight of each retrieval method**, a linear score combination can slightly outperform rank fusion in relevance metrics
* **Emphasizing a Superior Signal:** Score normalization allows you to explicitly emphasize the more reliable model for your use case. In a general document search, some queries might be answered mostly by keyword matching while others need semantic understanding. By adjusting weights (or using query-dependent logic), you can give BM25 or the neural model more influence when appropriate. 

> * **Controlled Merging (Fewer False Positives):** A normalized linear combination gives more continuous control over how results merge, which can reduce the chance of a less relevant document being boosted solely due to one method. For instance, if a semantic model returns a somewhat off-target result at a high rank, RRF would still elevate it because of its rank. A score-based approach can mitigate this by yielding a lower normalized relevance score for that document (since BM25 might give it 0, and the semantic score alone may not be enough to beat other combined scores). Thus, in a well-tuned hybrid system, score normalization can lead to a more precise top-10 ranking, as each document’s final score reflects a balance of both lexical and semantic relevance.

Reviewer 4: Talking about RRF details here could be a little confusing for someone not familiar with the formula since the detailed breakdown is below.  Thoughts on moving this and the other "When to use RRF" to their own section below the RRF breakdown?

Author: Added mentioned in the next section

> * **Controlled Merging (Fewer False Positives):** A normalized linear combination gives more continuous control over how results merge, which can reduce the chance of a less relevant document being boosted solely due to one method. For instance, if a semantic model returns a somewhat off-target result at a high rank, RRF would still elevate it because of its rank. A score-based approach can mitigate this by yielding a lower normalized relevance score for that document (since BM25 might give it 0, and the semantic score alone may not be enough to beat other combined scores). Thus, in a well-tuned hybrid system, score normalization can lead to a more precise top-10 ranking, as each document’s final score reflects a balance of both lexical and semantic relevance.

Reviewer 3: what does this mean: "gives more continuous control over how results merge"? specifically I'm not sure about the word `continuous`, I think we can drop it from this sentence

#### Hybrid Search with Reciprocal Rank Fusion 

Rank-based techniques focus on the position or rank of a document in the result set rather than its raw score. These methods are particularly useful when combining results from diverse sources where raw scores may not be directly comparable. RRF normalizes based on the rank of documents, making it robust to differences in scoring scales across different algorithms.

```
PUT /_search/pipeline/rrf-pipeline
{
  "description": "Post processor for hybrid RRF search",
  "phase_results_processors": [
    {
      "score-ranker-processor": {
        "combination": {
          "technique": "rrf"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

```
GET /bookstore_catalog/_search?search_pipeline=rrf-pipeline
{

>   "_source": {

Reviewer 3: same comment as before, better drop this section as it's not significant

        {
          "neural": {
            "title_embedding": {
              "query_text": "science fiction",
              "model_id": "aVeif4oB5Vm0Tdw8zYO2",
              "k": 5
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

This query uses:

* `hybrid`: Combines lexical and semantic searches
* `search_pipeline`: Applies the RRF score combination

How RRF works:

1. **Sort documents by score**: Each query method sorts documents by score on every shard.
2. **Assign rank positions**: Documents are ranked based on score for each query.
3. **Apply the RRF formula**: The RRF score is computed using the following formula:

```
rankScore(document_i) = sum((1/(k + query_1_rank), (1/(k + query_2_rank), ..., (1/(k + query_j_rank)))

```

In this formula, `k` is a rank constant, and `query_j_rank` represents the ranking of a document in a particular query method. The example in the following diagram applies this formula using the default rank constant of 60.

1. **Add rank contributions**: Rank calculations are combined, and documents are sorted by decreasing rank score.
2. **Return the top results**: The highest-ranked documents are retrieved based on the query size.

> **When to use Rank Fusion:**

Reviewer 3: One more item can be added - if nature of the query and/or data is changing over time, with fine-tuned weights that needs to be maintained continuously to keep relevancy high, with RRF this is not needed

* **Heterogeneous Score Distributions:** Rank fusion (especially RRF) excels when BM25 and semantic models produce scores on incompatible scales or with outliers. It avoids complex score calibration by using result ranks only. This yields *stable rankings* even if one query method’s scores would otherwise dominate after normalization.
* **No Tuning or Calibration Needed:** RRF is a *“plug & play”* method – it requires no pre-training, weight tuning, or knowledge of score ranges. In general-purpose search systems (with diverse queries and content), it’s often impractical to hand-tune weighting for every scenario. Rank fusion performs robustly out-of-the-box, making it a strong default when labeled data for calibration is unavailable
* **Robust to Outliers and Domain Shifts:** Because RRF ignores absolute score magnitude, an extreme scoring outlier won’t skew the results. This is useful in general collections where some queries or documents might produce anomalously high scores under one model. Similarly, if the data distribution or query mix changes over time, RRF remains stable without needing re-calibration, since it always works off relative rank positions

### Conclusion

> The evolution of search techniques in OpenSearch demonstrates the platform's versatility and power in addressing diverse search requirements. While traditional lexical search methods like BM25 continue to provide fast and precise keyword matching, and semantic search offers deep contextual understanding, it is the hybrid search approach that truly revolutionizes information retrieval. Hybrid search in OpenSearch represents a powerful synthesis of these techniques, addressing the limitations of each individual method. 

Author: That's a good title. @sean-zheng-amazon what do you think?

> The evolution of search techniques in OpenSearch demonstrates the platform's versatility and power in addressing diverse search requirements. While traditional lexical search methods like BM25 continue to provide fast and precise keyword matching, and semantic search offers deep contextual understanding, it is the hybrid search approach that truly revolutionizes information retrieval. Hybrid search in OpenSearch represents a powerful synthesis of these techniques, addressing the limitations of each individual method. 

Reviewer 3: my two cents - I think proposed title is a bit off, mainly because other systems/engines support hybrid search for years, for instance ES does this from 2022, in more general sense Google as part of their search engine - from 2015-16. It's present in OpenSearch since 2023. Original title makes more relevant to current context.

#### Considerations for Implementation

* **Data Characteristics**: The nature of your data and typical user queries should guide your choice of search technique.

> * **Performance Requirements**: Consider the trade-offs between search accuracy and computational resources, especially for large-scale applications.

Reviewer 3: what exactly do you mean here? Is this about hybrid query vs doing hybrid search outside OS, or it's one normalization/combination technique vs another?

Author: trade-offs between different searches like bm25, semantic and hybrid based on resource computation

> * **Tuning and Optimization**: Each technique requires careful tuning and testing to achieve optimal results for specific use cases.

Reviewer 3: except for RRF :)

> * **Scalability**: As your data grows, ensure your chosen search strategy can scale effectively.

Reviewer 3: can we give any recommendations here, any techniques that adapts to large datasets better then others?

Author: We don't want to provide any recommendation here. That's why kept it generic here

Reviewer 3: ok, then what's the purpose for this whole section, is this to simply list consideration, something that user should think of?

Author: Use just some general considerations

---
layout: post

> title:  "Building effective hybrid Search in OpenSearch: Techniques and best practices"

Reviewer 5: Update title: 
"Building effective hybrid search in OpenSearch: Techniques and best practices"

authors:
  - kazabdu
  - seanzheng
  - kolchfa

> date: 2025-04-11

Reviewer 5: Update to: 2025-04-17

```json
PUT /_search/pipeline/min_max-search-pipeline
{
  "description": "Post processor for hybrid search",
  "phase_results_processors": [
    {
      "normalization-processor": {
        "normalization": {
          "technique": "min_max"
        },
        "combination": {
          "technique": "arithmetic_mean",
          "parameters": {
            "weights": [0.3, 0.7]
          }
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

This pipeline applies min-max normalization to each subquery's results and combines them using a weighted arithmetic mean: 30% lexical, 70% semantic.

Then run a hybrid query using the pipeline:

```json
GET /bookstore_catalog/_search?search_pipeline=min_max-search-pipeline
{
  "query": {
    "hybrid": {
      "queries": [
        {
          "match": {
            "title": {
              "query": "science fiction"
            }
          }
        },
        {
          "neural": {
            "title_embedding": {
              "query_text": "science fiction",
              "model_id": "aVeif4oB5Vm0Tdw8zYO2",
              "k": 5
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

> This query uses  the following parameters:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This query uses the following parameters:
```

> - `hybrid`: OpenSearch's built-in hybrid query type

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- `hybrid`: OpenSearch's built-in hybrid query type.
```

> - `search_pipeline`: Applies the min-max normalization and weighted score combination

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- `search_pipeline`: Applies the min-max normalization and weighted score combination.
```

> ### How min-max normalization works

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### How score-based normalization works
```

> Min-max normalization works as follows:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Score-based normalization works as follows:
```

1. OpenSearch runs both the `match` and `neural` queries.

> 1. The pipeline normalizes each result set using min-max scaling.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The pipeline normalizes each result set using a score-based technique (in this example, min-max scaling).
```

> 1. The pipeline normalizes each result set using a min-max technique (in this example, min-max scaling).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The pipeline normalizes each result set using min-max scaling.
```

1. Normalized scores are combined using a weighted average to produce the final score.

> In this example, the final document scores are calculated as:  

Reviewer 6: "the final document scores are calculated using the following formula"?

> In this example, the final document scores are calculated as:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this example, the final document scores are calculated using the following formula:  
```

```r
0.3 * normalized_BM25_score + 0.7 * normalized_neural_score
```

> ### When to use score-based normalization

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## When to use score-based normalization
```

> Score normalization is useful in scenarios where you want fine-tuned control over how results from different methods are combined. Consider using it when:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Score-based normalization is useful in scenarios where you want fine-tuned control over how results from different methods are combined. Consider using it when:
```

- **You can calibrate or train weights**: If you have a reliable way to normalize scores (for example, using min-max or L2 norms) and **tune the weight of each retrieval method**, a linear score combination can slightly outperform rank fusion in relevance metrics.

> - **You want to emphasize one method**: Score normalization allows you to explicitly emphasize the more reliable model for your use case. In a general document search, some queries might be answered mostly by keyword matching while others need semantic understanding. By adjusting weights (or using query-dependent logic), you can give BM25 or the neural model more influence when appropriate. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **You want to emphasize one method**: Score normalization allows you to explicitly emphasize the more reliable model for your use case. In a general document search, some queries might be answered mostly by keyword matching, while others might need semantic understanding. By adjusting weights (or using query-dependent logic), you can give BM25 or the neural model more influence when appropriate. 
```

> - **You need precise control over merging (fewer false positives)**: A normalized linear combination gives you more control over how results merge, which can reduce the chance of a less relevant document being boosted solely because of one method. For example, if a semantic model returns a somewhat irrelevant result at a high rank, rank-based normalization (described in the next section) still makes this result high-scoring because of its rank. A score-based approach can mitigate this by yielding a lower normalized relevance score for that document (because this document might be scored at 0 by BM25, and the semantic score alone may not be enough to beat other combined scores). Thus, in a well-tuned hybrid system, score normalization can lead to a more precise top-10 ranking, because each document's final score reflects a balanced lexical and semantic relevance.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **You need precise control over merging (fewer false positives)**: A normalized linear combination gives you more control over how results are merged, which can reduce the chance of a less relevant document being boosted solely because of one method. For example, if a semantic model returns a somewhat irrelevant result with a high rank, rank-based normalization (described in the next section) still applies a high score to the result because of its rank. A score-based approach can mitigate this by yielding a lower normalized relevance score for the document (because BM25 might give the document a score of 0, and the semantic score alone may not be enough to beat other combined scores). Thus, in a well-tuned hybrid system, score normalization can lead to a more precise top-10 ranking because each document's final score reflects a balanced lexical and semantic relevance.
```

> 

Reviewer 6: Line 191: "beat" => something like "overcome" or "exceed"?

## Hybrid search using RRF

> Rank-based techniques focus on a document's position in the result set, rather than its raw score. These techniques are especially useful when combining results from different retrieval methods whose scores aren't directly comparable. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Rank-based techniques focus on a document's position in the result set rather than its raw score. These techniques are especially useful when combining results from different retrieval methods whose scores aren't directly comparable. 
```

> **Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF)** is one such technique. It uses the rank of each document in individual query results to calculate a combined score, making it resilient to mismatched scoring scales across methods like BM25 and semantic search.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
**Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF)** is one such technique. It uses the rank of each document in individual query results to calculate a combined score, making it resilient against mismatched scoring scales across methods like BM25 and semantic search.
```

> **RRF** is one such technique. It uses the rank of each document in individual query results to calculate a combined score, making it robust against mismatched scoring scales across methods like BM25 and semantic search.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
**Reciprocal Rank Fusion (RRF)** is one such technique. It uses the rank of each document in individual query results to calculate a combined score, making it robust against mismatched scoring scales across methods like BM25 and semantic search.
```

> 

Reviewer 6: Line 198: I'm not following the meaning of "robust against". Please replace with clearer phrasing.

Reviewer 2: Reworded.

> Define the RRF search pipeline:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
First, define the RRF search pipeline:
```

```json
PUT /_search/pipeline/rrf-pipeline
{
  "description": "Post processor for hybrid RRF search",
  "phase_results_processors": [
    {
      "score-ranker-processor": {
        "combination": {
          "technique": "rrf"
        }
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> Run the hybrid query:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Then run the hybrid query:
```

```json
GET /bookstore_catalog/_search?search_pipeline=rrf-pipeline
{
  "query": {
    "hybrid": {
      "queries": [
        {
          "match": {
            "title": {
              "query": "science fiction"
            }
          }
        },
        {
          "neural": {
            "title_embedding": {
              "query_text": "science fiction",
              "model_id": "aVeif4oB5Vm0Tdw8zYO2",
              "k": 5
            }
          }
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

> This query uses:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This query uses the following parameters:
```

- `hybrid`: Combines results from lexical and semantic search.
- `search_pipeline`: Applies the RRF combination logic to rank the final results.

### How RRF works

RRF works as follows:

1. **Sort documents by score**: Each query method sorts documents by score.

> 1. **Assign rank positions**: Documents are ranked based on their scores for each query.

Reviewer 2: I think the original is clearer.

1. **Compute the RRF score**: For each document, the RRF score is computed using the following formula:
    ```python
    rankScore(document_i) = sum((1/(k + query_1_rank), (1/(k + query_2_rank), ..., (1/(k + query_j_rank)))
    ```

    where:

>     -  `k` is a rank constant 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
    -  `k` is a rank constant.
```

>     - `query_j_rank` represents the ranking of a document in a particular query method. 

Reviewer 6: "in" => "for" or "when using"?

>     - `query_j_rank` represents the ranking of a document in a particular query method. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `query_j_rank` represents the ranking of a document for a particular query method. 
```

1. **Add rank contributions**: Rank calculations are combined, and documents are sorted by decreasing rank score.
1. **Return the top results**: The highest-ranked documents are retrieved based on the query size.

### When to use rank based normalization

> Consider using rank based in the following situations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Consider using rank-based normalization in the following situations:
```

> 

Reviewer 6: Line 275: "by only using result ranking" ("ranking" instead of "rank")? Please use a word other than "dominate" and provide context. Dominate what?

Reviewer 2: Dominate the score. Reworded.

- **Heterogeneous score distributions**: Rank fusion (especially RRF) excels when BM25 and semantic models produce scores on incompatible scales or with outliers. It avoids complex score calibration by using result ranks only. This yields *stable rankings* even if one query method’s scores would otherwise dominate after normalization.

> - **No tuning or calibration needed**: RRF is an out-of-the-box method: it requires no pre-training, weight tuning, or knowledge of score ranges. In general-purpose search systems (with diverse queries and content), it's often impractical to hand-tune weighting for every scenario. Rank fusion is a robust default when labeled data for calibration is unavailable.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **No tuning or calibration needed**: RRF is an out-of-the-box method. It requires no pretraining, weight tuning, or knowledge of score ranges. In general-purpose search systems (with diverse queries and content), it's often impractical to manually tune weights for every scenario. Rank fusion is a robust default when labeled data for calibration is unavailable.
```

> * **Resilient to outliers and domain shifts**: Because RRF ignores absolute score magnitude, an extreme-scoring outlier won't skew the results. This is useful in general collections, in which some queries or documents might produce anomalously high scores using one model. Similarly, if the data distribution or query mix changes over time, RRF remains stable without needing recalibration because it uses relative rank positions.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* **Resilient to outliers and domain shifts**: Because RRF ignores absolute score magnitude, an extremely high-scoring outlier won't skew the results. This is useful in general collections, in which some queries or documents might produce anomalously high scores when using one model. Similarly, if the data distribution or query mix changes over time, RRF remains stable without needing recalibration because it uses relative rank positions.
```

> * **Adaptable to changing environments:** When the nature of queries and/or data evolves over time, score-based methods often require continuous fine-tuning of weights to maintain high relevancy. RRF eliminates this need for ongoing maintenance because it relies on relative rankings rather than absolute scores. This makes it particularly valuable in dynamic environments where constant recalibration is resource-intensive or impractical.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* **Adaptable to changing environments:** When the nature of queries and/or data evolves over time, score-based methods often require continuous fine-tuning of weights to maintain high relevancy. RRF eliminates this need for ongoing maintenance because it relies on relative rankings rather than absolute scores. This makes it particularly valuable in dynamic environments where constant recalibration is resource intensive or impractical.
```

## Conclusion

> Search in OpenSearch has evolved to meet a wide range of needs, from precise keyword matching with BM25 to deep contextual retrieval with semantic models. Hybrid search brings these strengths together, offering a flexible, powerful approach to information retrieval. By combining lexical and semantic methods, it balances relevance, recall, and ranking stability.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
OpenSearch has evolved to meet a wide range of needs, from precise keyword matching using BM25 to deep contextual retrieval using semantic models. Hybrid search combines these strengths, offering a flexible, powerful approach to information retrieval. By combining lexical and semantic methods, hybrid search balances relevance, recall, and ranking stability.
```

> Search in OpenSearch has evolved to meet a wide range of needs from precise keyword matching with BM25 to deep contextual retrieval with semantic models. Hybrid search brings these strengths together, offering a flexible, powerful approach to information retrieval. By combining lexical and semantic methods, it balances relevance, recall, and ranking stability.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Search in OpenSearch has evolved to meet a wide range of needs, from precise keyword matching with BM25 to deep contextual retrieval with semantic models. Hybrid search brings these strengths together, offering a flexible, powerful approach to information retrieval. By combining lexical and semantic methods, it balances relevance, recall, and ranking stability.
```

When implementing hybrid search, use the following **best practices**:

- **Data and query types**: Choose techniques based on how structured, sparse, or domain-specific your content and queries are.
- **Performance requirements**: Consider the trade-offs between search accuracy and computational resources, especially for large-scale applications.
- **Tuning and testing**: Carefully tune and test each technique to achieve optimal results for your specific use case.

> - **Scalability**: As your data grows, ensure your chosen search strategy can scale effectively.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- **Scalability**: As your data grows in volume, ensure that your chosen search strategy can scale effectively.
```

## What's next?

As machine learning and natural language processing continue to evolve, OpenSearch will keep expanding its hybrid and semantic search capabilities by offering improved model integration, fine-tuned ranking, and better support for real-world use cases.

> By understanding how each search method works and when to use it you can build smarter, more relevant, and more responsive search experiences.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
By understanding how each search method works and when to use it, you can build smarter, more relevant, and more responsive search experiences.
```

meta_description: Learn about lexical, semantic, and hybrid search in OpenSearch. Discover how hybrid search merges results from multiple query sources for improved relevance.
---

In the evolving world of search technology, OpenSearch provides a wide range of capabilities to support modern search needs. It starts with traditional keyword-based techniques, like lexical search using BM25 (Best Matching 25), and expands to more advanced methods like semantic and hybrid search. BM25 remains a reliable and efficient choice for many applications that rely on keyword relevance. Semantic search builds on this by using machine learning to capture meaning beyond keywords. Advanced hybrid techniques combine lexical and semantic approaches, using normalization methods like score-based and rank-based algorithms to balance and integrate scores from different search methods. These techniques progressively enhance search relevance and flexibility, catering to diverse search requirements in modern applications.

In this blog post, we'll explore each of these techniques---lexical, semantic, and hybrid---and deep dive into how hybrid search works in OpenSearch.

> ## Comparing lexical and semantic search

Author: Don't we want to keep it as Comparing Lexical and Semantic Search

Reviewer 2: If you're referring to capitalization, then our style guide prescribes using sentence case (first word capitalized and subsequent words lowercase).

}
```

This query uses the following parameters:

- `title_embedding`: The dense vector field that contains embeddings of document titles.
- `query_text`: The input query to be converted into an embedding.
- `k`: The number of nearest neighbors to retrieve.

### Summary

Lexical search methods like BM25 offer fast and accurate keyword matching but do not capture the meaning or context of the query. Semantic search, on the other hand, excels at understanding intent and natural language, but may miss important keywords---especially in fact-based searches.

> As more use cases demand both keyword precision and semantic understanding, especially in applications using generative AI, hybrid search becomes essential. OpenSearch's hybrid search combines the strengths of both approaches to improve relevance and flexibility.

Author: Can we mention `OpenSearch's solution hybrid search`?

Reviewer 2: What does "solution" convey in this context?

Author: Hybrid Search is OpenSearch's solution to combine lexical and semantic searches

Reviewer 2: Let's ask @natebower to look at this sentence during editorial review.

- `hybrid`: OpenSearch's built-in hybrid query type
- `search_pipeline`: Applies the min-max normalization and weighted score combination

> ### How min-max normalization works

Reviewer 2: Changed lines 171, 173, and 176

}
```

This query uses:

- `hybrid`: Combines results from lexical and semantic search.
- `search_pipeline`: Applies the RRF combination logic to rank the final results.

### How RRF works

RRF works as follows:

1. **Sort documents by score**: Each query method sorts documents by score.
1. **Assign rank positions**: Documents are ranked based on their scores for each query.
1. **Compute the RRF score**: For each document, the RRF score is computed using the following formula:
    ```python
    rankScore(document_i) = sum((1/(k + query_1_rank), (1/(k + query_2_rank), ..., (1/(k + query_j_rank)))
    ```

    where:
    -  `k` is a rank constant 
    - `query_j_rank` represents the ranking of a document in a particular query method. 
    

>     The example in the following diagram applies this formula using the default rank constant of 60. <!-- TODO: insert diagram -->

Author: We can remove this line
